# Adipocyte and *Active* transcriptome in normal, healthy breast tissue from Komen Tissue Bank

Since cancer-adjacent normal breast tissues commonly express an *Active* transcriptome phenotype that increases future risk of breast cancer death (PMCID: [PMC5515343](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5515343/)), we assessed the transcriptional phenotypes of normal breast samples from 151 healthy, parous women (ages 27–66) with mean BMI of 29.60 (+/- 7.92) and breast cancer risk estimate (Gail score) of 1.27 (+/- 1.34). RNA sequencing identified 52% (78/151) of samples with the *Active* breast phenotype. While *Active* signature genes were found to be most variably expressed in mammary adipocytes, donors with the *Active* phenotype had no difference in BMI but significantly higher Gail scores (1.46 vs. 1.18; p=0.007). *Active* breast samples possessed 1.6-fold more (~80%) adipocyte nuclei, larger cross-sectional adipocyte areas (p<0.01), and 0.5-fold fewer stromal and epithelial cell nuclei (p<1e-6). Their transcriptomes were enriched in gene sets associated with adipogenesis and fat metabolism (FDR q<10%), higher signature scores for cAMP-dependent lipolysis known to drive breast cancer progression, white adipose tissue browning (Wilcoxon p<0.01), and genes associated with adipocyte activation (leptin, adiponectin) and remodeling (CAV1, BNIP3), adipokine growth factors (IGF-1, FGF2), and pro-inflammatory fat signaling (IKBKG, CCL13). In conclusion, the risk-associated *Active* transcriptome phenotype first identified in cancer-adjacent breast tissue occurs commonly in healthy women without breast disease who, based on Gail risk scores, would generally not qualify for breast cancer chemoprevention. This breast cancer risk-associated phenotype appears driven by an activated and pro-tumorigenic adipocyte microenvironment that can predate breast cancer development.    

<button class="cohortButton" data-bookmark="4618d22010817aedd9412fdc39f04f32">Example view: transcriptome signatures</button>

[Improve this page](https://github.com/ucscXena/cohortMetaData/blob/master/cohort_Normal%20Breast%20(Benz%202020)/info.mdown) on github
